John Richard Kasich (/ˈkeɪsᵻk/ KAY-sick; born May 13, 1952) is an American politician, the 69th and current Governor of Ohio, first elected in 2010 and re-elected in 2014.
Kasich served nine terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives, representing Ohio's 12th congressional district from 1983 to 2001. His tenure in the House included 18 years on the House Armed Services Committee and six years as chairman of the House Budget Committee. He was a key figure in the passage of both welfare reform and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
He was a commentator on Fox News Channel, hosting Heartland with John Kasich from 2001 to 2007. He also worked as an investment banker, serving as managing director of the Lehman Brothers office in Columbus, Ohio.
In the 2010 Ohio gubernatorial election, Kasich defeated Democratic incumbent Ted Strickland. He was re-elected in 2014, defeating Democrat Ed FitzGerald by 30 percentage points.
Kasich unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination for president in 2000 and in 2016. During the 2016 campaign, he was able to gain 161 delegates, and was the last candidate to drop out.


== Early life ==

John Richard Kasich was born in McKees Rocks, Pennsylvania, an industrial town near Pittsburgh. He is the son of Anne (Vukovich) and John Kasich, who worked as a mail carrier. Kasich's father was of Czech descent, while his mother was of Croatian descent. Both his father and mother were children of immigrants and were practicing Roman Catholics. He has described himself as "a Croatian and a Czech".
After attending public schools in McKees Rocks, Kasich enrolled at The Ohio State University, where he joined the Alpha Sigma Phi fraternity. As a freshman, he wrote a letter to President Richard Nixon describing concerns he had about the nation and requesting a meeting with the President. The letter was delivered to Nixon by the University's president Novice Fawcett and Kasich was granted a 20-minute meeting with Nixon in December 1970.
Earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science from The Ohio State University, in 1974, he went on to work as a researcher for the Ohio Legislative Service Commission. From 1975 to 1978, he served as an administrative assistant to then-state Senator Buz Lukens.


== Ohio Senate career ==
In 1978, Kasich ran against Democratic incumbent Robert O'Shaughnessy for State Senate. A political ally of Kasich remembers him during that time as a persistent campaigner: “People said, ‘If you just quit calling me, I’ll support you.'" At age 26, Kasich won with 56% of the vote, beginning his four-year term representing the 15th district. Kasich was the youngest person ever elected to the Ohio Senate.
One of his first acts as a State Senator was to refuse a pay raise. Republicans gained control of the State Senate in 1980; but Kasich went his own way, for example, by opposing a budget proposal he believed would raise taxes and writing his own proposal instead.


== U.S. House of Representatives (1983–2001) ==

In 1982, Kasich ran for Congress in Ohio's 12th congressional district, which included portions of Columbus as well as the cities of Westerville, Reynoldsburg, Worthington, and Dublin. He won the Republican primary with 83% of the vote and defeated incumbent Democrat U.S. Congressman Bob Shamansky in the general election by a margin of 50%–47%. He was re-elected eight times after 1982, winning at least 64% of the vote each time.
During his congressional career, Kasich was considered a fiscal conservative, taking aim at programs supported by Republicans and Democrats. He worked with Ralph Nader in seeking to reduce corporate tax loopholes.
Kasich was a member of the House Armed Services Committee for 18 years. He developed a "fairly hawkish" reputation on that committee, although he "also zealously challenged" defense spending he considered wasteful. Among the Pentagon projects that he targeted were the B-2 bomber program (teaming up with Democratic representative Ron Dellums to cut the program, their efforts were partly successful) and the A-12 bomber program (ultimately canceled by defense secretary Dick Cheney in 1991). He participated extensively in the passage of the Goldwater–Nichols Act of 1986, which reorganized the U.S. Department of Defense. He also pushed through the bill creating the 1988 Base Realignment and Closure Commission, which closed obsolete U.S. military bases, and successfully opposed a proposed $110 million expansion of the Pentagon building after the end of the Cold War. He also "proposed a national commission on arms control" and "urged tighter controls over substances that could be used for biological warfare."

Kasich said he was "100 percent for" the first Persian Gulf War as well as the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, but said that he did not favor U.S. military participation in the Lebanese Civil War or in Bosnia. In 1997, with fellow Republican representative Floyd Spence, he introduced legislation (supported by some congressional Democrats) for the U.S. to pull out of a multilateral peacekeeping force in Bosnia. In the House, he supported the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, a Dellums-led initiative to impose economic sanctions against apartheid-era South Africa.


=== Ranking member of the House Budget Committee ===

In 1993, Kasich became the ranking Republican member of the House Budget Committee. Kasich and other House Budget Committee Republicans proposed an alternative to President Bill Clinton's deficit reduction bill, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993. That proposal included funds to implement Republican proposals for health care, welfare, and crime control legislation and for a child tax credit. The Penny-Kasich Plan, named after Kasich and fellow lead sponsor Tim Penny, was supported by Republicans and conservative Democrats. It proposed $90 billion in spending cuts over five years, almost three times as much in cuts as the $37 billion in cuts backed by the Clinton administration and Democratic congressional leaders. About one-third ($27 billion) of the proposed Penny-Kasich cuts would come from means-testing Medicare, specifically by reducing Medicare payments to seniors who earned $75,000 or more in adjusted gross income. This angered the AARP, which lobbied against the legislation. Another $26 billion of the Penny-Kasich plan's cuts would have come from the U.S. Department of Defense and foreign aid, which led Secretary of Defense Les Aspin to say that the plan would destroy military morale. Another $27 billion in savings would have come from federal layoffs. The proposal was narrowly defeated in the House by a 219-213 vote.
As ranking member of the Budget Committee, Kasich proposed his own health care reform plan as a rival to the Clinton health care plan of 1993 championed by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, but more market-based. As Time magazine wrote, "The Kasich plan would have covered all Americans by 2005, using a form of an individual mandate that would have required employees to purchase insurance through their employers. (The mandate was an idea initially supported by conservative groups like the Heritage Foundation.)"
On November 17, 1993, Kasich voted to approve the North American Free Trade Agreement, casting a "yea" vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act.
In 1994, Kasich was one of the Republican leaders to support a last-minute deal with President Bill Clinton to pass the Federal Assault Weapons Ban. After a series of meetings with Clinton's Chief of Staff, Leon Panetta, a longtime friend of Kasich, the assault weapons ban was passed when 42 Republicans crossed party lines and voted to ban assault weapons with the Democrats. His support of the assault-weapons ban angered the National Rifle Association, which gave Kasich an "F" rating in 1994 as a result.


=== Chairman of the House Budget Committee ===

In 1995, when Republicans gained the majority in the United States Congress following the 1994 election, Kasich became chairman of the House Budget Committee. In 1996, he introduced the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act in the House, an important welfare reform bill signed into law by President Clinton.
During the 1996 presidential campaign, Republican nominee Bob Dole was reported to have considered Kasich as a vice presidential running mate but instead selected Jack Kemp, a former congressman and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
In 1997, Kasich rose to national prominence after becoming "the chief architect of a deal that balanced the federal budget for the first time since 1969"—the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
In 1998, Kasich voted to impeach President Clinton on all four charges made against him. In 1999, while the Senate prepared to vote on the charges, he said: "I believe these are impeachable and removable offenses."


== 2000 presidential campaign ==

Kasich did not seek re-election in 2000. In February 1999, he formed an exploratory committee to run for president. In March 1999 he announced his campaign for the Republican nomination. After very poor fundraising, he dropped out in July 1999, before the Iowa Straw Poll, and endorsed governor George W. Bush of Texas.


== Private sector career (2001–2009) ==
After leaving congress, Kasich went to work for Fox News, hosting Heartland with John Kasich on the Fox News Channel and guest-hosting The O'Reilly Factor, filling in for Bill O'Reilly as needed. He also occasionally appeared as a guest on Hannity & Colmes.


=== Books ===
Kasich has authored three books. Courage is Contagious, published in 1998, made the New York Times bestseller list. His second book, Stand for Something: The Battle for America's Soul, was published in 2006. In his most recent book, Every Other Monday, published in 2010, he discusses the strength he has drawn from a Bible discussion group he has been part of for many years; this book was also a New York Times bestseller.


=== Business career ===
Kasich served on the board of directors for several corporations, including Invacare Corporation and the Chicago-based Norvax Inc. In 2001, Kasich joined Lehman Brothers' investment banking division as a managing director, in Columbus, Ohio. He remained at Lehman Brothers until it declared bankruptcy in 2008. That year, Lehman Brothers paid him a $182,692 salary and a $432,200 bonus. He stated that the bonus was for work performed in 2007.

"I wasn't involved in the inner workings of Lehman, I was a banker. I didn't go to board meetings or go and talk investment strategy with the top people. I was nowhere near that. That's like, it's sort of like being a car dealer in Zanesville and being blamed for the collapse of GM."


=== Political activities from 2001 to 2009 ===
Republicans tried to recruit Kasich to run for Ohio governor in 2006, but he declined to enter the race.
In 2008, Kasich formed Recharge Ohio, a political action committee (PAC) with the goal of raising money to help Republican candidates for the Ohio House of Representatives and Ohio Senate, in an effort to retain Republican majorities in the Ohio General Assembly. Kasich served as honorary chairman of the PAC.


== Ohio governor ==


=== 2010 election ===

On May 1, 2009, Kasich filed papers to run for governor of Ohio against incumbent Democratic governor Ted Strickland. He formally announced his candidacy on June 1, 2009. On January 15, 2010, Kasich announced Ohio State Auditor Mary Taylor as his running mate.
During a speech before Ashtabula County Republicans in March 2009, Kasich talked about the need to "break the back of organized labor in the schools," according to the Ashtabula Star Beacon.
Ohio teachers' unions supported Democrat Ted Strickland, and after Kasich's gubernatorial victory, he said, “I am waiting for the teachers’ unions to take out full-page ads in all the major newspapers, apologizing for what they had to say about me during this campaign."
Elsewhere, he said he was willing to work with "unions that make things."
On May 4, 2010, Kasich won the Republican nomination for governor, having run unopposed. On November 2, 2010, Kasich defeated incumbent Democrat Ted Strickland in a closely contested race to win the governorship. He was sworn in at midnight on January 10, 2011, in a private ceremony at the Ohio Statehouse in Columbus. It was then followed by a ceremonial inauguration at the Ohio Theatre at noon on the same day.


=== 2014 re-election campaign ===

In November 2014, Kasich won re-election, defeating Democrat Ed FitzGerald, the county executive of Cuyahoga County, 64% to 33%. He won 86 of 88 counties.
Kasich, who was elected with Tea Party support in 2010, faced some backlash from some Tea Party activists. His decision to accept the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act's expansion of Medicaid caused some Tea Party activists to refuse to support his campaign. Kasich supported longtime ally and campaign veteran Matt Borges over Portage County Tea Party chairman Tom Zawistowski for the position of chairman of the Ohio Republican Party. Zawistowski secured just three votes in his run for the chairmanship. Tea Party groups announced they would support a primary challenger, or, if none emerged, the Libertarian nominee.
Ultimately, Zawistowski failed to field anyone on the ballot and the Libertarian nominee (former Republican State Representative Charlie Earl) was removed from the ballot after failing to gain the required number of valid signatures necessary for ballot access.


== Political positions and record ==
The Guardian reports that Kasich is sometimes "billed as a moderate" due to his "unassuming image," but has a record in the House and as Ohio governor that "puts him a big step to the right of what many Americans would consider in the middle." Larry Sabato, the director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics, who has known Kasich for years, says that "If you had asked me in the 90s about Kasich I would have said he was a Gingrich conservative." Kasich's friend Curt Steiner, former chief of staff to former Republican Ohio governor and U.S. senator George Voinovich, described Kasich as a "solid Republican" with "an independent streak."


=== Abortion ===
Kasich is a "firm abortion opponent" and describes himself as pro-life. Since 2011, Kasich has signed 16 anti-abortion measures into law. In June 2013, Kasich signed into law a state budget, HB 59, which stripped some $1.4 million in federal dollars from Planned Parenthood by placing the organization last on the priority list for family-planning funds; provided funding to crisis pregnancy centers; and required women seeking abortions to undergo ultrasounds. The budget also barred abortion providers from entering into emergency transfer agreements with public hospitals, requiring abortion providers to find private hospitals willing to enter into transfer agreements. Another provision of the bill requires abortion providers to offer information on family planning and adoption services in certain situations. Under the budget, rape crisis centers could lose public funding if they counseled sexual assault victims about abortion.
In 2015, Kasich said in an interview that Planned Parenthood "ought to be de-funded" but Republicans in Congress should not force a government shutdown over the issue.


=== Climate change, energy, and environment ===
In a speech in April 2012, Kasich acknowledged that climate change is real and is a problem. In the same speech Kasich said that the Environmental Protection Agency should not regulate carbon emissions and that instead states and private companies should be in charge of regulating coal-fired power plant emissions. In 2015, Kasich stated that he does not know all the causes of climate change.
In 2014, Kasich signed into law a bill freezing Ohio's renewable portfolio standard (RPS) program for two years. Ohio's RPS program was created by 2008 legislation and required the state to acquire 12.5 percent of its energy portfolio from renewable sources and to reduce energy consumption by 22 percent by 2025. The legislation signed by Kasich to stop the program was supported by Republican legislative leaders, utility companies, and some industry groups, and opposed by environmentalists, some manufacturers, and the American Lung Association.
In his 2015 budget plan, Kasich proposed raising the tax rate on hydraulic fracturing (fracking) activities. Specifically, Kasich's plan called for imposing a 6.5 percent severance tax on crude oil and natural gas extracted via horizontal drilling and sold at the source (about $3.25 per $50 barrel of oil), and for an additional 4.5 percent tax per thousand cubic feet on natural gas and liquefied natural gas (about $0.16 per thousand cubic feet). The proposal would not affect conventional drilling taxes.
Kasich formerly supported fracking in Ohio state parks and forests, signing legislation in mid-2011 authorizing him to appoint a five-member commission to oversee the leasing of mineral rights on state land to the highest bidders. In 2012, Kasich aides planned a campaign with a stated goal to "marginalize the effectiveness of communications by adversaries about the initiative" to bring fracking to state parks and forests, naming in an email the Ohio Sierra Club and state Representatives Robert F. Hagan and Nickie Antonio as adversaries of the plan. Kasich never appointed the commission, and the promotional plan was never put into effect. A memo and email relating to the 2012 promotional campaign were publicly released for the first time in February 2015, which according to the Columbus Dispatch attracted criticism from state environmental and liberal groups, as well as Democratic state legislators, who called for an investigation. On the same day the governor reversed himself, with a spokesman saying, "At this point, the governor doesn't support fracking in state parks. We reserve the right to revisit that, but it’s not what he wants to do right now, and that's been his position for the past year and a half."
In April 2015, Kasich signed a bill aimed at protecting Lake Erie's water quality. The bill places restrictions on the spread of manure and other fertilizers that contribute to toxic algal blooms and requires large public water treatment plants to monitor phosphorus levels. The bill had been unanimously approved by both chambers of the Ohio Legislature the previous month.
Kasich is a supporter of the Keystone XL oil pipeline project; along with other Republican governors, Kasich signed an open letter in support of federal approval for the project in February 2015.


=== Policing and criminal justice ===


==== Prison privatization ====
To offset a state budget deficit, Kasich proposed selling five state prisons to the for-profit prison industry. The Lake Erie prison was sold for $72.7 million to the Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), generating savings of $3 million. Kasich's Director of Corrections, Gary Mohr, whom he had hired in January 2011, had previously worked for CCA, but he said that he removed himself from the sales process. In an audit in October 2012, CCA was cited for 47 contractual violations, and failed a second audit later that year. In July 2015, the Kasich administration announced its intent to sell the North Central Correctional Institution at Marion, in order to recoup the state's original investment in the facility and invest the proceeds in community-based alternatives to prison.


==== Policing standards ====
Following the separate fatal police shootings of John Crawford III and Tamir Rice, a 12-year-old boy in Ohio, while each were holding BB guns, where grand juries decided not to indict any of the officers involved, Kasich created the Ohio Collaborative Community-Police Advisory Board "to address what he described as frustration and distrust among some Ohioans toward their police departments, particularly among the black community." The 23-member task force (with 18 members appointed by Kasich) was appointed in January 2015 and issued its 629-page final report and recommendations in April 2015. The report recommended greater accountability and oversight for police agencies and officers, further community education and involvement in policing, and new use-of-force and recruitment, hiring, and training standards for police agencies.
In April 2015, Kasich created the Ohio Collaborative Community-Police Advisory Board, a twelve-member board tasked (in conjunction with the Ohio Office of Criminal Justice Services and the Ohio Department of Public Safety) with developing statewide standards for the recruiting, hiring and screening of police officers, and for the use of force (including deadly force) by police. The advisory board, the first of its kind in Ohio, was also tasked by Kasich with developing "model policies and best practice recommendations to promote better interaction and communication between law enforcement departments and their home communities." In August 2015, the board issued its recommendations, which placed "an emphasis on the preservation of human life and restrict officers to defending themselves or others from death or serious injury."
In August 2015, Kasich said that he was open to the idea of requiring police officers to wear body cameras.


==== Capital punishment ====
As of July 2015, Kasich had presided over the executions of twelve inmates and commuted the death sentences of five inmates. In January 2015, Kasich announced that, due to pending litigation and other issues, he was delaying all seven executions scheduled through January 2016. At that time, the most recent execution had occurred in January 2014.


==== Executive clemency ====

According to records obtained by the Columbus Dispatch through a public-records request, Kasich granted 66 of 1,521 requests for executive clemency, about 4.4 percent of the non-death-penalty cases he received and acted upon from 2011 to 2014. This was the lowest clemency rate of any Ohio governor since at least the 1980s, when records began to be kept.


==== Criminal justice reform issues ====
Kasich supports various criminal justice reform efforts; according to conservative Washington Post columnist George Will, Kasich "favors fewer mandatory minimum sentences and has instituted prison policies that prepare inmates for re-integration into communities." In 2011, Kasich signed sentencing reform legislation which allowed judges to sentence defendants convicted of non-violent fourth- and fifth-degree felonies to "community-based halfway house facilities" instead of prison; expanded the earned credit system to allow inmates to reduce their sentences; and allowed felons who have already served 80 percent or more of their sentences to be immediately released.
In 2012, Kasich signed into law a bill, sponsored by Cleveland Democratic Senator Shirley Smith and Cincinnati Republican Senator Bill Seitz, easing the collateral consequences of criminal conviction.
In September 2014, Kasich touted the Ohio's prison system's recidivism rate, which is one of the lowest in the nation. U.S. Senator Rob Portman, a Republican, attributed a drop in Ohio's recidivism rate "to the bipartisan work of the state legislature, Governor Kasich, Ohio's reentry leaders and the success of programs made possible at the federal level by the Second Chance Act," which Portman sponsored.
In 2015, Kasich proposed a state budget including $61.7 million for addiction treatment services for prisoners.


==== Drug policy ====
Kasich initially expressed opposition to medical marijuana in 2012, saying "There's better ways to help people who are in pain." However, in late 2015 and early 2016, Kasich said he was open to legalization of medical marijuana.
In a 2015 interview with radio talk show host Hugh Hewitt, Kasich said he was opposed to the legalization of recreational drugs in some states and equated marijuana and heroin, stating: "In my state and across this country, if I happened to be president, I would lead a significant campaign down at the grassroots level to stomp these drugs out of our country."
When Kasich was asked by Hewitt whether, if elected president, he would federally enforce marijuana laws in states which have legalized marijuana, Kasich characterized it as a states' rights issue and said that "I'd have to think about it." When asked the same question later in 2015, Kasich said: "I would try to discourage the states from doing it...but I would be tempted to say I don't think we can go and start disrupting what they've decided."
Kasich opposed "Issue 3," an Ohio ballot measure in 2015 that proposed the legalization of recreational marijuana, saying it was a "terrible idea."
In March 2014, in an effort to address the opioid epidemic, Kasich signed legislation (passed unanimously in both chambers of the state legislature) expanding the availability of naloxone, a lifesaving antidote to opioid overdoses; the measure allowed friends and family members of addicts to obtain access to naloxone and for first responders to carry naloxone. In July 2015, Kasich signed legislation further expanding the availability of naloxone, making it available without a prescription.


=== Economic policy ===


==== State budgets and taxation ====
During Kasich's tenure, the state has eliminated a budget shortfall that his administration has estimated at $8 billion, but which the Cleveland Plain Dealer estimated at closer to $6 billion. (The New York Times put the number at $7.7 billion). Ohio also increased its "rainy day fund" from effectively zero to more than $2 billion.
Kasich "closed the budget shortfall in part by cutting aid to local governments, forcing some of them to raise their own taxes or cut services. And increasing sales taxes helped make the income tax cuts possible." An analysis by the Plain Dealer in March 2016 found that more than 70 cities and villages had lost at least $1 million a year due to Kasich's budget and taxation policy.
In March 2008, Kasich called for "phasing out" Ohio's state income tax.
During Kasich's time as governor, Ohio ranked 22nd out of the 50 states for private-sector job growth, at 9.3%.
Kasich signed a state budget in 2011 which eliminated the state's estate tax effective January 1, 2013.
In 2013, Kasich signed into law a $62 billion two-year state budget. The budget provided for a 10-percent state income tax cut phased in over three years, and an increase in the state sales tax from 5.5 percent to 5.75 percent. It also included a 50% tax cut for small business owners on the first $250,000 of annual net income. Kasich used his line-item veto power to reject a measure that would stop the Medicaid expansion (which Kasich had accepted from the federal government) to cover nearly 275,000 working poor Ohioans.
In 2015, Kasich signed into law a $71 billion two-year state budget after using his line-item veto power to veto 44 items. The overall 2015 budget provides a 6.3 percent state income-tax cut as a part one component of a $1.9 billion net tax reduction and lowers the top income-tax rate to slightly below 5 percent. The budget also "spends $955 million more in basic state aid for K-12 schools than the last two-year period"; "boosts state funding for higher education to help offset a two-year tuition freeze at public universities"; expands the Medicaid health program; increases cigarette taxes by 35 cents a pack; and "prohibits independent health care and child care workers under contract with the state from unionizing."


==== Senate Bill 5 and labor issues ====
On March 31, 2011, in his first year as governor, Kasich signed into law Senate Bill 5, a controversial labor law which restricted collective bargaining rights of public employees, such as police officers, firefighters, and teachers. The legislation, championed by Kasich, prohibited all public employees from striking and restricted their ability to negotiate health care and pension benefits. The final version of the legislation signed by Kasich had passed the state Senate in a 17-16 vote (with six Senate Republicans joining all of the Senate Democrats in voting no) and the state House in a 53-44 vote, with two members abstaining.
Democrats and labor unions opposed the legislation and placed a referendum on the November 2011 ballot to repeal SB 5. SB 5 also "sparked numerous protests with thousands of union workers and other opponents descending on the Statehouse, mirroring similar demonstrations in Wisconsin and injecting Ohio into the national debate over Republican governors' attempts to curb public workers' collective bargaining rights." Kasich and other supporters of SB 5 characterized the legislation as a necessary measure "to help public employers control labor costs" and reduce tax burdens to make Ohio more competitive with other states, while labor unions and other opponents characterized the bill as "a union-busting attack on the middle class."
Ohio voters rejected Senate Bill 5 in a 61 percent to 39 percent vote, which was viewed as a rebuke to Kasich. On election night, Kasich said in a speech at the Ohio Statehouse that "It's clear the people have spoken. I heard their voices. I understand their decision. And frankly, I respect what the people have to say in an effort like this." Following this defeat, Kasich dropped efforts for a broad-based collective bargaining restrictions, although in 2012 he supported a bill including "provisions reminiscent of Senate Bill 5" but applying only to the Cleveland Metropolitan School District.
In May 2015, Kasich rescinded executive orders issued by his predecessor Ted Strickland in 2007 and 2008 that provided the right to home health care contractors and in-home child care contractors to collectively bargain with the state.


==== Balanced budget amendment ====
Kasich has campaigned for a balanced budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Kasich created a 501(c)(4) group, Balanced Budget Forever, to promote the cause.


=== Civil liberties and electronic surveillance ===
In speaking in the 2016 campaign on domestic surveillance, Kasich has "straddled the line," praising Rand Paul for saying that "we need to get warrants," but also saying "if there's information they need, the government needs to get it." Kasich has said there needs to be "a balance between good intelligence and the need to protect Americans from what can become an aggressive government somewhere down the road."
On one occasion, Kasich spoke out against proposals to mandate that technology companies provide a "backdoor" for the government to access encrypted devices, saying that this could end up aiding hackers. On a subsequent occasion, Kasich said that encryption was dangerous because it could stymie government antiterrorism investigations.
Kasich has condemned whistleblower Edward Snowden as a traitor.


=== Education ===
Kasich proposed new legislation which would increase funding to charter schools and poor school districts. He canceled the school-funding formula put into place by his Democratic predecessor, Governor Ted Strickland.
During Kasich's tenure as governor, he pushed to expand charter schools, increase the number of school vouchers that use public money to pay for tuition at private schools, implement a "merit pay" scheme for teachers, and evaluate teachers by student standardized test scores in math and reading. Kasich supports the Common Core State Standards and has criticized Republicans who turned against it.
During Kasich's tenure, funding for traditional public schools declined by about $500 million, while funding for charter schools has increased at least 27 percent. As calculated by the Howard Fleeter/Education Tax Policy Institute, total school funding under Kasich (including both charter and district schools) has ranged from a low of $7.1 billion in fiscal year 2013 to $7.8 billion in fiscal year 2015, which was higher than its previous peak under Kasich's predecessor, Ted Strickland. As calculated by the Howard Fleeter/Education Tax Policy Institute, Kasich has proposed total school funding of $8.0 billion in fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017. The Ohio Department of Education—which includes more spending areas than Fleeter's does and so reports higher numbers—projects total school funding for Ohio schools to rise to slightly under $10.5 billion by the end of fiscal year 2017.
Analysts disagree "on whether Kasich's education budgets give increases beyond inflation." In the 2015 state budget, Kasich used his line-item veto power "to cut more than $84 million of funding from public schools."
According to a September 2014 story in the Columbus Dispatch, Kasich favors allowing public school districts "to teach alternatives to evolution—such as intelligent design—if local school officials want to, under the philosophy of 'local control.'"


=== Foreign and defense policy ===

In November 2002, Kasich urged the invasion of Iraq, telling a crowd of students at The Ohio State University: "We should go to war with Iraq. It's not likely that (Saddam) Hussein will give up his weapons. If he did he would be disgraced in the Arab world."
In an interview in August 2015, Kasich said: "I would never have committed ourselves to Iraq." A Kasich spokesman subsequently said that "Kasich was not revising history" but was instead saying that the Iraq War was a mistake given the facts available now.
Kasich has said that the U.S. "should've left a base in Iraq" instead of withdrawing troops in 2011.
In 2015, Kasich said that airstrikes were insufficient to combat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, and he would send U.S. ground troops to fight ISIL.
Kasich opposed the landmark 2015 international nuclear agreement with Iran, and in September 2015 was one of fourteen Republican governors who sent a letter to President Obama stating "that we intend to ensure that the various state-level sanctions [against Iran] that are now in effect remain in effect," despite the agreement.
Kasich has expressed support for the U.S.'s drone program. He has said, however, that the program should be overseen by the Department of Defense, and not by the CIA.
Kasich has said that he wants to lift budget sequestration for military spending, and "spend more if necessary."
In November 2015, Kasich said that if elected president, he "would send a carrier battle group through the South China Sea" to send a message to China regarding their claims of sovereignty there.


=== LGBT issues ===
In the U.S. House of Representatives in 1996, Kasich voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, which barred federal recognition of same-sex marriage. During this period, Kasich supported a ban on same-sex marriage in Ohio and stated that he did not approve of the "gay lifestyle." As governor of Ohio, Kasich signed an executive order banning discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation for state employees; this was more narrow than the previous executive order signed by his predecessor because it omitted protections for gender identity.
During the 2016 presidential campaign, Kasich struck a more moderate tone compared to his Republican opponents. In June 2015, following the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, which held that there is a fundamental right to same-sex marriage under the Fourteenth Amendment, Kasich said that he was "obviously disappointed" and that he believes in "traditional marriage," but that the ruling was "the law of the land and we'll abide by it" and that it was "time to move on" to other issues. Kasich indicated that he did not support an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to overturn the decision. In response to a debate question about how he would explain his position on same-sex marriage to one of his daughters if she were gay, Kasich responded, "The court has ruled, and I said we'll accept it. And guess what, I just went to a wedding of a friend of mine who happens to be gay. Because somebody doesn't think the way I do doesn't mean that I can't care about them or can't love them. So if one of my daughters happened to be that, of course I would love them and I would accept them. Because you know what? That's what we're taught when we have strong faith."
In September 2015, Kasich commented on the highly publicized case of Kim Davis (the Rowan County, Kentucky clerk who refused to comply with a federal court order directing her to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples), saying: "Now, I respect the fact that this lady doesn't agree but she's also a government employee, she's not running a church, I wouldn't force this on a church. But in terms of her responsibility I think she has to comply. I don't think —I don't like the fact that she's sitting in a jail, that's absurd as well. But I think she should follow the law."


=== Gun policy ===
While in the U.S. House of Representatives, Kasich had a mixed record on gun policy. He was one of 215 Representatives to vote for the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, which became law in 1994, but voted against the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act ("Brady Bill"), which established current background check laws.
As governor, Kasich shifted to more pro-gun positions. In 2011, he signed one bill permitting concealed handguns in bars and another making it easier for people with misdemeanor drug convictions to purchase guns. In 2012, Kasich signed a bill allowing gun owners to transport weapons with loaded magazines in their vehicles and expanding concealed carry permit reciprocity. In December 2014, Kasich signed legislation that reduced the numbers of hours of training required to obtain a concealed carry permit and eliminated the training requirement for permit renewals.


=== Health care ===
Kasich opted to accept Medicaid-expansion funding provided by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA or "Obamacare") in Ohio. This decision angered many Statehouse Republicans, who wanted Kasich to reject the expansion.
Total spending on Medicaid by the state was almost $2 billion (or 7.6 percent) below estimates for the fiscal year ending in June 2015, according to a report by Kasich's administration. The lower-than-expected costs were attributed to expanded managed care, shorter nursing home stays and increased in-home care for seniors, capitated reimbursement policies, increased automation to determine eligibility for the program and pay care providers, and an improving economy in the state which allowed some participants to move out of the program.
In an October 2014 interview, Kasich said that repeal of the ACA was "not gonna happen" and stated that "The opposition to it was really either political or ideological. I don't think that holds water against real flesh and blood, and real improvements in people's lives." Kasich later said that he was referring solely to the law's Medicaid expansion, and that "my position is that we need to repeal and replace" the rest of the law.
In 2015, Kasich expressed support for many provisions of the ACA (ensuring coverage for people with preexisting conditions, the use of insurance exchanges, and Medicaid expansion), but opposed mandates.


=== Immigration ===
In 2010, while running for governor, Kasich expressed support for amending the U.S. Constitution to abolish the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of jus soli (birthright) citizenship for people born in the United States. Kasich also told the Columbus Dispatch at the time that "One thing that I don't want to reward is illegal immigration."
In 2014, Kasich acknowledged that his stance on immigration has "evolved" because "maybe [I'm] a little smarter now," stating: "I don't want to see anybody in pain. So I guess when I look at this now, I look at it differently than I did in '10. ... When I look at a group of people who might be hiding, who may be afraid, who may be scared, who have children, I don't want to be in a position of where I make it worse for them." That year, Kasich expressed openness to a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, saying at a Republican Governors Association (RGA) meeting in Florida, "I don't like the idea of citizenship when people jump the line, [but] we may have to do it." Kasich was the only governor at the RGA conference "to express openly a willingness to create a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants."
In August 2015, while running for president, Kasich called for a path to legal status (but not necessarily citizenship) for undocumented immigrants and for a guest worker program. Kasich also appeared to disavow his earlier stance against birthright citizenship, stating "I don't think we need to go there"; called for completion of a fence along the U.S.-Mexico border; and noted that undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as young children may obtain driver's licenses in Ohio.
In October 2015, Kasich criticized Donald Trump's "plan to build a wall along the Mexican border and remove immigrants who entered the United States illegally," calling these notions "just crazy."


=== Lieutenant governor ===
In 2014, Kasich defended his lieutenant governor, Mary Taylor, after Taylor's chief of staff and that chief of staff's administrative assistant resigned following a timesheet probe. Kasich said of Taylor's handling of the matter: "Mary did the right thing and I support her."


=== Racial diversity in Cabinet ===
Upon taking office in 2011, Kasich received criticism for appointing an initial all-white cabinet of 22 members. Responding to criticism for not appointing any black, Hispanic, or Asian Cabinet members, Kasich said: "I don't look at things from the standpoint of any of these sort of metrics that people tend to focus on, race or age, or any of those things. It's not the way I look at things... I want the best possible team I can get." Shortly afterward, on February 2, 2011, Kasich made his first minority appointment to the Cabinet, naming Michael Colbert, a black man, to lead the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services.


=== Transportation ===
Throughout his first gubernatorial campaign, Kasich opposed the Ohio Hub high-speed passenger rail project (a proposed 258-mile Cleveland-to-Cincinnati train) and promised to cancel it.
As governor-elect, Kasich lobbied the federal government to use $400 million in federal dollars allocated for high-speed rail for freight rail projects instead. In a November 2010 letter to Kasich, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood wrote that the federal funding was specifically allocated by the 2009 economic stimulus act for high-speed rail, and could not be used for other purposes. In a December 2010 meeting with President Barack Obama, Kasich again unsuccessfully lobbied to use the grant money for freight rail rather than high-speed rail.
In December 2010, the U.S. Department of Transportation announced that Ohio would lose the $385 million in grant funds allocated for high-speed passenger rail, since Kasich had informed them that he had no intention of ever building high-speed rail projects. (Almost $15 million had already been spent for preliminary engineering.) The $385 million was instead diverted to other states, such as California, New York, and Florida, which planned high-speed rail using the grant money for its congressionally intended purpose. Outgoing governor Ted Strickland, who championed the project, expressed disappointment, saying that the loss of funding for the project was "one of the saddest days during my four years as governor" and that "I can't understand the logic of giving up these vital, job-creating resources to California and Florida at a time when so many Ohioans need jobs."
Kasich is an opponent of the Cincinnati Streetcar project.
In April 2015, Kasich signed a two-year transportation budget bill which allocated $7.06 billion for highway construction and maintenance, $600 million to local governments for road and bridge projects, and an additional million over the last budget for public transportation.


=== Voting rights ===
In February 2014, Kasich signed into law a bill which cut six days from Ohio's early voting period, including the "golden week" (a period at the beginning of early voting when voters could both register to vote and cast an in-person absentee ballot). The measures were hotly contested in the state legislature, passing on a party-line vote, with Republicans in favor and Democrats opposed. This measure prompted two federal lawsuits. One, brought by the American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio on behalf of the NAACP and League of Women Voters of Ohio, resulted in a settlement in April 2015, in which the state agreed to provide evening and Sunday hours for early voting in elections in Ohio through 2018. The second, still-pending lawsuit was brought in May 2015 by Marc Elias, lead campaign lawyer for Hillary for America; that suit alleges that the Ohio measures disproportionately burden black, Latino and young voters. In July 2015, Kasich said that it was "pure demagoguery" for Hillary Clinton to "say that there are Republicans who are deliberately trying to keep people from voting."
In April 2015, Kasich used his line-item veto power to veto a provision added to a highway-budget bill by Republicans in the state legislature that would have required college students who register to vote in Ohio to obtain a state driver's license and vehicle registration, imposing an estimated $75 in motor vehicle costs on out-of-state college students who wanted to vote in the state. The veto was celebrated by voting rights advocates, Ohio Democrats, and the Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial board, which viewed the proposal as effectively a "poll tax" motivated by a partisan desire to limit college-town voting.


=== Judicial appointments ===
In Ohio, justices of the Ohio Supreme Court are elected, but the governor can fill unexpired terms. In May 2012, Ohio Supreme Court Associate Justice Evelyn Lundberg Stratton announced she would retire at the end of 2012. In December 2012, Kasich appointed Judge Judith L. French to Stratton's unexpired term, which ran from January 1, 2013 through January 1, 2015.


== 2016 presidential campaign ==

In April 2015, he had announced the formation of his "New Day For America" group. Formerly a 527 group, it filed as a super PAC in July 2015. Between April 20 and June 30, 2015, the super PAC raised over $11.1 million from 165 "reportable contributions," including 34 contributions of $100,000 or more. Major contributors to the PAC include Floyd Kvamme, who donated $100,000, Philip Geier Jr., who donated $500,000, and Jim Dicke, chairman emeritus of Crown Equipment Corporation, who donated $250,000. According to FEC filings, Kasich's campaign had $2.5 million on hand at the beginning of 2016.
In May 2015, sources close to him had said he was "virtually certain" to run for the Republican nomination for president. On July 21, 2015, Kasich announced his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination during a speech at the Ohio Union, the student union of his alma mater, the Ohio State University.
On January 30, 2016, the New York Times endorsed Kasich for the Republican nomination. The Times editorial board strongly rebuked leading candidates Donald Trump and Senator Ted Cruz and wrote that Kasich, "though a distinct underdog, is the only plausible choice for Republicans tired of the extremism and inexperience on display in this race."
On the campaign trail, Kasich sought to project a sunny, optimistic message, describing himself as "the prince of light and hope." This marked a change in tone for Kasich, who had developed a reputation as an abrasive governor. Viewed as a long-shot contender, Kasich took an "above-the-fray approach to his rivals" and "ran unapologetically as a candidate with experience" even as others ran as "outsider" contenders.
Kasich came in second place in the New Hampshire primary on February 9, 2016, behind winner Trump. The Cincinnati Enquirer reported that this was "the best possible result" for Kasich and lent "credence to the notion that he can emerge" as a Republican alternative to Trump and Cruz.
Ultimately, however, Kasich's message "never caught on in a campaign that ... exposed the anger and frustration coursing through the electorate" and he "found himself stuck in fourth place in a three-man race, trailing Senator Marco Rubio of Florida in the delegate count" although Rubio had dropped out of the race in March.
The only state won by Kasich was his home state of Ohio, which gave him 66 delegates in its March 2016 winner-take-all primary but still left him with "a steep delegate deficit against his rivals." Kasich's unsuccessful campaign strategy hinged on the possibility of a contested (or brokered) Republican National Convention, in which no single candidate has enough delegates to win the nomination on the first ballot, something that has not happened in either of the two major parties' presidential nominating conventions since 1952. Kasich suspended his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination (i.e., effectively dropped out of the race) on May 4, 2016, one day after Trump won the Republican primary in Indiana. The third remaining contender, Cruz, quit the race shortly before Kasich did, leaving Trump as the only candidate remaining in the Republican field and hence the party's presumptive nominee.


=== Aftermath ===
Following his withdrawal from the race, Kasich did not extend his support to Trump. In May and June 2016, Kasich said that Trump was a divisive figure rather than a "unifier," said that he had no plans to endorse Trump in the near future, and ruled out accepting as position as vice-presidential running mate under Trump. Kasich stated that it was "hard to say" whether he would ever endorse Trump and added: "I can't go for dividing, name calling, or somebody that doesn't really represent conservative principles."


== Personal life ==
Kasich has been married twice. His first marriage was to Mary Lee Griffith from 1975 to 1980, and they had no children. Griffith has campaigned for Kasich since their divorce. Kasich and his current wife, Karen Waldbillig, a former public relations executive, were married in March 1997 and have twin daughters, Emma and Reese. John has a younger brother Rick, age 59. 
Kasich was raised a Catholic, but considers denominations irrelevant, and stated that "there's always going to be a part of me that considers myself a Catholic." He drifted away from his religion as an adult, but came to embrace an Anglican faith after both his parents were killed in a car crash by a drunk driver on August 20, 1987. Kasich has said he "doesn't find God in church" but does belong to the St. Augustine church in Westerville, Ohio, which is part of the Anglican Church in North America, a conservative church that broke off from the Episcopal Church.


== Electoral history ==


== See also ==
Ohio's 12th congressional district
List of United States Representatives from Ohio
Ohio gubernatorial election, 2010
Ohio gubernatorial election, 2014
Republican Party presidential candidates, 2016
List of John Kasich presidential campaign endorsements, 2016


== References ==
Citations

Bibliography
Kasich, John (1999). Courage Is Contagious: Ordinary People Doing Extraordinary Things to Change the Face of America. New York: Random House. ISBN 9780385491488. 
Kasich, John (2010). Every Other Monday: Twenty Years of Life, Lunch, Faith, and Friendship. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781439172186. 
Rechcigl, Miloslav Jr. (2013). Czech American Timeline: Chronology of Milestones in the History of Czechs in America. Bloomington, Indiana: Author House. ISBN 9781481757065. 
Weisskopf, Michael; Maraniss, David (2008). Tell Newt to Shut Up: Prize-Winning Washington Post Journalists Reveal H. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781439128886. 


== External links ==
Governor John Kasich official Ohio government website
John Kasich for Governor
John Kasich for President
John Kasich at DMOZ
Appearances on C-SPAN
U.S. Representative (1983–2001)
Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission---  
  
**VoteMatch**   
  
** Stimulus better than market-led recovery **

**POSITIONS**

  * **Strongly Support** means you believe: The federal government should inject as much funding as needed to recuperate from the Great Recession, including direct federal job creation. Nationalization of banks and companies is more appropriate than bailouts. 
  * **Support** means you believe: The federal government should institute incentives for private corporations for more hiring, to recuperate from the Great Recession. Funding to "bail out" private companies should be accompanied by rules for corporate behavior and repayment. 
  * **Oppose** means you believe: Cutting taxes and reducing regulation is the means to recuperate from the Great Recession. 
  * **Strongly Oppose** means you believe: The federal government caused the Great Recession, and keeping out of the economy will end it. 

This question is looking for your views on the government's role in moving the
country out of the Great Recession.   However you answer the above question
would be similar to your response to these statements:

  * Corporate malfeasance caused the [Great Recession](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Recession). 
  * More regulation is the solution to the Great Recession, not the cause of it. 
  * A company that is [too big to fail](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Too_big_to_fail) should be nationalized, or run by the federal government. 
  * Corporate bailouts made some sense, to save jobs, but bank bailouts just rewarded the wrongdoers. 
  * Wall Street bankers of the early 2000s are no different than the [robber barons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robber_baron_\(industrialist\)) of the early 1900s. 
  * [Occupy Wall Street](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupy_Wall_Street) expresses the voice of the people agaisnt the voice of Big Business. 
How do you decide between "Support" and "Strongly Support" when you agree with
both the descriptions above? (Or between "Oppose" and "Strongly Oppose"). The
strong positions are generally based on matters of **PRINCIPLES** where the
regular support and oppose positions are based on **PRACTICAL** matters. If
you answer "No Opinion," this question is not counted in the VoteMatch answers
for any candidate. If you give a general answer of Support vs. Oppose,
VoteMatch can more accurately match a candidate with your stand. Don't worry
so much about getting the strength of your answer exactly refined, or to think
too hard about the exact wording of the question -- like candidates!

  * **Strongly Support** means you believe in the **principle** of federal intervention in the economy. 
  * **Support** means you believe government oversight is needed for **practical** reasons: the Great Recession is a big enough cause, but most others aren't. 
  * **Oppose** means you believe in **practical** reasons for lower taxation and deregulation, to quickly increase hiring. 
  * **Strongly Oppose** means you believe in the **principle** of lower taxation and deregulation, regardless of the current situation. 

**    
****BACKGROUND**

### Major components of FY2013 budget  
(Pres. Obama's latest budget)

**Spending in FY2013's $3.8 trillion budget** | **Federal revenue sources**  
---|---  
**_Non-discretionary spending:_**   
$820 billion (22%) Social Security payments  
$811 billion (21%) Medicare/Medicaid/SCHIP payments  
$246 billion ( 6%) interest on the National Debt  
$583 billion (15%) other mandatory payments (including TARP)  
**_Discretionary spending:_**   
$700 billion (18%) national defense  
$565 billion (15%) other discretionary spending  
$ 97 billion ( 3%) Overseas Contingency Operations (war supplemenetals) |  
$1,294 billion (34%) individual income taxes  
$990 billion (26%) social insurance (FICA/Medicare)  
$365 billion (10%) corporate income taxes  
$234 billion ( 6%) other taxes & duties  
$901 billion (24%) budget deficit  
  
The federal budget is not difficult to understand. Politicians intentionally
muddy the water and thereby make the federal budget difficult to understand,
to gain political advantage for one political goal or another. We will explain
the basics here -- everything else is politics.

  * _**Spending and revenue:**_ The budget has two important halves: spending (where the money goes) and revenue (where the money comes from). The two sides have to equal each other, in order to account for all the money. 

### Where the money goes

  * _**National Debt:**_ The annual budget deficits don't get paid off each year -- they just accumulate year after year, into the National Debt, which is currently over $13 trillion. We pay interest in that debt -- amounting to $901 billion in 2012. 
  * _**Entitlements:**_ The largest budget spending items, totalling $1.6 trillion in 2012, are Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid -- the so-called entitlement programs. The policy options for these programs are discussed in the [Social Security](Social_Security.htm) section. 
  * _**Non-discretionary spending:**_ The federal budget separates mandatory payments from discretionary spending. Entitlements and interest (plus another $583 billion in smaller programs) are deemed non-discretionary while everything else is deemed discretionary. Those terms are political double-talk -- Congress has the discretion to make political decisions on funding mandatory programs just like every other political decision. But because so many people rely on these funds, it is politically difficult to alter them in the short-term, so most discussion applies to the very long-term (with small changes in current policy that have large effect years later). 
  * _**National Defense spending:**_ Funding the Pentagon is by far the largest discretionary item in the budget. The policy options for defense programs are discussed in the [Homeland Security](Homeland_Security.htm) section. 
  * _**Supplemental spending:**_ Congress and the Bush Administration routinely pretended that the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan posed unexpected expenses. Therefore they were not funded in the regular budget, but instead by a special Supplemental Spending Bill which is voted on separately, outside of the budget, each year. Pres. Obama in 2010 changed to using an on-budget Overseas Contingency Operations instead of off-budget war supplemental bills. 
  * _**Discretionary spending:**_ All other non-defense expenditures total up to 14% of the budget. This budget section is where most Congressional debate focuses, even though the other budget sections are far larger. Republicans endlessly lambast NEA spending ($0.1 billion for the National Endowment for the Arts in 2008) and Democrats equally lambast spending on the Special Prosecutor (about $0.06 billion to produce the report that led to Bill Clinton's impeachment). 
  * If Republicans want to reduce the size of government, or if Democrats want fiscal responsibility, they should focus on the Big Four listed above: defense spending; Social Security; Medicare/Medicaid; and the budget deficit. Everything else is political -- they have a very minor impact on the budget totals. On the other hand, we should keep in mind the enormous scale of the budget: as one analyst said, A billion here, a billion there, and pretty soon youre talking real money. 
  * Politicians often call for "freezing all but the non-defense non-entitlement budget" -- a typical politicians' attempt to muddy the water -- defense and entitlements account for the majority of the budget. 
  * Furthermore, Congress has full control over "mandatory" spending (it's only mandated from the previous year; Congress can change it at any time). 
  * Voters should listen for other (very common!) attempts at muddying the water, by looking at what are the actual underlying amounts being discussed. 

### Where the money comes from

  * _**Individual income taxes:**_ The biggest component of federal revenue is the income tax -- and this is what politicians mostly talk about when discussing policy. The $1.3 trillion in personal income taxes does not include state income taxes, sales tax, or any other local tax. Tax policy is detailed in our [Tax Reform](Tax_Reform.htm) section. 
  * _**Social insurance (FICA):**_ This comes up in the 2012 debates as raising the cap. In theory, each person's individual FICA funds their own retirement, so the tax is "capped" at income of $106,800 in 2012, up from $92,500 in 2008. Income above $106,800 has no FICA tax. In practice, the sum of FICA payments all go into the Social Security Trust Fund, so some politicians say the individual link is meaningless, and therefore FICA is a regressive tax (the wealthy pay less). Raising the cap, or removing it entirely, would raise revenue substantially. Details are discussed in the [Social Security](Social_Security.htm) section. 
  * _**Corporate income taxes:**_ US corporate income taxes are the second-highest in the world, tax-cutter politicians constantly remind us. The sum is still only 1/6th of what individuals pay. Details of all corporate tax policy are discussed in the [Corporations](Corporations.htm) section. 
  * _**Other taxes & duties:**_ While only 6% of federal revenue comes from everything other than those three sources, this smallest section once again includes a lot of the political debate. The "Death Tax" (inheritance tax) is included here; and Mitt Romney was damaged by claiming that raising user fees in this category should not count as tax increases. 
  * _**Budget deficit:**_ Unlike normal budgets, the federal government can print its own money. The deficit amounted to $901 billion in 2012. The form of printing money to cover the deficit varies from year to year; the recent favorite is federal bonds that are sold to foreign governments and other wealthy entities. That leads to political accusations that, for example, the Chinese government is funding our deficit. 

### Budget Buzzwords

  * _**QE3**_ refers to Quantitative Easing of the money supply by the Federal Reserve, the third round of which took place in Sept. 2012. The QE3 program entails purchasing $40 billion monthly in mortgage-backed securities. QE1 and QE2, earlier in the Great Recession, injected $2.3 trillion into the economy, also via the securities market. Critics call the programs printing money which is inherently inflationary. 
  * The _**sequester**_ refers to automatic budget cuts mandated after the debt-ceiling crisis of 2011. The Super committee" failed to come up with a budget replacement plan in late 2011, so the sequestration rules take effect in 2013. Those rules specify across-the-board spending cuts of $1.2 trillion in the period 2013 to 2021. The cuts apply to Medicare and DoD roughly equally; i.e., social spending and defense spending are both cut for political balance. 
  * The _**debt ceiling**_: The 2013 budget includes a deficit of $901 billion (more spending than revenue). The annual budget deficits dont get paid off each yearthey just accumulate year after year, into the National Debt, which is currently over $15 trillion. We pay interest on that debtamounting to $246 billion in 2012. Congress determines the debt ceiling, which is the total amount that the federal government can be in debt. The actual debt must remain lower than the debt ceiling or the government may not borrow more money; currently the ceiling is set at $16.4 trillion. 
  * _**Dodd-Frank**_ refers to Sen. Chris Dodd (D, CT) and Rep. Barney Frank (D, MA), the co-authors of the DoddFrank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. The legislation was intended to reform the rules of the financial and insurance industry to avoid another "meltdown" like the one in mid-2008 which initiated the Great Recession. 
  * _**Earmarks**_ refers to itemized spending in legislation, i.e., funding targeted toward a particular project in a particular place. The controversy comes about because often the particular place includes the home district of the legislator writing or sponsoring the bill (which is known derisively as "Pork-Barrel Spending"). Earmarks are currently legal and are generally considered ethical; earmark reform focuses on publicizing their existence and perhaps on a future Line Item Veto to remove some. 
  * _**Fannie & Freddie**_ refer to the Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA, Fannie Mae) and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC, Freddie Mac). Fannie and Freddie were "GSEs"--government-sponsored enterprises--half-private, half-federal, until 2008, when they were placed under full federal control. Their role is to assist banks with creating individual mortgages. 
  * _**PAYGO**_ refers to a "pay-as-you-go" policy, where all expenditures in a bill are explicitly paid for, instead of requiring borrowing. The Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 required all new spending bills to include how the spending would be balanced by revenue enhancements (taxes or fees) or other spending cuts. The PAYGO statute expired in 2002, but some congressional bills still describe offsets for new spending. 
  * _**Simpson-Bowles**_ refers to the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, and its conclusions released in 2010. It is named after its two chairs, Sen. Alan Simpson (R, WY) and Erskine Bowles (D, NC). The Commission proposed reducing the national debt by a combination of increased revenue (raising taxes, including a 15-cent gas tax); reductions in discretionary spending; Medicare cost controls; raising the Social Security retirement age; and a reduction in entitlements. 

### Major components of FY2009 budget  
(Pres. Bush's last budget)

**Spending in FY2008's $2.9 trillion budget** | **Federal revenue sources**  
---|---  
**_Non-discretionary spending:_**   
$610 billion (21%) Social Security payments  
$602 billion (21%) Medicare/Medicaid/SCHIP payments  
$244 billion ( 8%) interest on the National Debt  
$302 billion (10%) other mandatory payments  
**_Discretionary spending:_**   
$550 billion (19%) national defense  
$392 billion (14%) other discretionary spending  
$192 billion ( 7%) War on Terror supplemental spending |  
$1,220 billion (42%) individual income taxes  
$910 billion (31%) social insurance (FICA/Medicare)  
$345 billion (12%) corporate income taxes  
$171 billion ( 6%) other taxes & duties  
$246 billion (9%) budget deficit  
  
### Major components of FY2000 budget  
(Pres. Clinton's last budget)

**Spending in FY2000's $1.8 trillion budget** | **Federal revenue sources**  
---|---  
$405 billion (23%) Social Security payments  
$328 billion (18%) Medicare/Medicaid payments  
$215 billion (12%) interest on the National Debt  
$226 billion (13%) other mandatory payments  
**_Discretionary spending:_**   
$262 billion (15%) national defense  
$330 billion (19%) other discretionary spending. |  
$900 billion (48%) individual income taxes  
$637 billion (34%) social insurance (FICA)  
$189 billion (10%) corporate income taxes  
$157 billion (8%) other taxes & duties  
  
### Budget Deficit versus National Debt

A budget deficit means that the amount the government receives in taxes in one
fiscal year is less than the amount that the government has spent. Generally,
the government borrows money from people by issuing bonds to cover the
deficit.

The accumulated borrowing is the National Debt that the government must repay
in the future. The current federal debt stands at over $13 trillion, which is
the equivalent of roughly $40,000 per person. The federal government pays over
$200 billion in annual interest on the national debt.

### Social Security Trust Fund

  * Much debate focuses on how the budget deficit is calculated and how the Social Security Trust Fund is accounted for. 
  * The Trust Fund is off-budget, which means it is not counted in the reporting of the budget. 
  * However, the government reports the budget surplus or deficit from a Unified Budget which _does_ include the Trust Fund. Hence the growth of the Fund offsets the shortfall in the budget. 
  * In 1998, the budget surplus was reported as $40 billion on the unified budget. Discounting the Trust Fund, the budget would have been in deficit by $50 billion. 
  * By 2008, th e budget deficit has returned in full force -- to $246 billion, and after 2008, increased substantially more for stimulus spending to deal with the Great Recession. 

### The Federal Reserve

Ben Bernanke is the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, which is known as
The Fed. (Alan Greenspan was the previous chairman) . The Federal Reserve
chairman is appointed to a 4-year term by the President but then cannot be
removed, to allow The Fed independence in monetary policy.

Bernankes primary responsibility is to set the interest rates that the
government pays on its bonds. Those rates in turn determine bank interest
rates, mortgage lending rates, and other interest rates.

When the Federal Reserve Bank feels that there is to much inflationary
pressure, they are likely to raise interest rates to slow the economy down.
Hence, Bernanke raises interest rates (tightens money) when he sees the
economy as overheating, and lowers interest rates (loosens money) when he sees
deflation threatening.

The longest economic expansion in US history ended in October 2001. During
2001, Alan Greenspan lowered interest an unprecedented 10 times in one year,
to provide monetary stimulus to the lagging economy. President Bush pushed for
fiscal stimulus by sending out $300 tax rebate checks to millions of
taxpayers.

In 2007-2008, to attempt to counter the mortgage crisis leading to a
recession, Ben Bernanke tried the same strategy, lowering interest rates
repeatedly.

### Mortgage Crisis

The Subprime mortgage crisis began with a sharp rise in home foreclosures in
the United States during the fall of 2006 and became a global financial crisis
during 2007 and 2008. The crisis began with the bursting of the housing bubble
in the U.S. and high default rates on "subprime", adjustable rate, and other
mortgage loans made to higher-risk borrowers with lower income or lesser
credit history than "prime" borrowers.

  * The mortgage crisis may lead to a recession because of the large number of people affected, and because the construction sector is a large factor in the economy. Hence politicians are all proposing "stimulus packages" to stave off a recession. Those proposals -- and reactions to Pres. Bush's version of a one-time tax rebate and later economic stimulus measures -- make up the majority of presidential candidates' comments in this topic area. 
  * **Economic Stimulus Act**: In Feb. 2008, Pres. Bush pushed legislation intended to avoid a full financial crisis, by mailing tax rebate checks of several hundred dollars to every taxpayer. The checks arrived at a time when fuel prices reached an all-time high, breaking $4 per gallon of gasoline in the summer of 2008. Discussion of additional economic stimulus (and whether the initial stimulus succeeded) was lost in the more urgent financial crises later in 2008. 
  * **Housing and Economic Recovery Act**: In late July 2008, Congress enacted legislation intended to avoid a full financial crisis, by injecting $300 billion into the mortgage market to restructure subprime mortgage loans. As a result, on Sept. 7, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the quasi-governmental mortgage entities, were placed under federal control. 
  * **Fannie and Freddie**: Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are "GSEs" -- government-sponsored enterprises -- semi-public corporations designed to assist banks with creating individual mortgages. The names are acronyms for Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA, Fannie Mae) and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC, Freddie Mac). "Semi-public" means half-private, half-federal, until 2008, when they were placed under full federal control. Their role is to assist banks with creating individual mortgages. 
  * **Emergency Economic Stabilization Act**: In Oct. 2008, Congress enacted a $700 billion package intended to alleviate severely contracted liquidity in the global credit market (which means banks would not lend each other funds, and hence no credit would be available to consumers for mortgages or credit cards); and to address insolvency threats to investment banks (which means, big banks would go broke, potentially causing a run on other banks as consumers lost confidence).   
  
\- This legislation is commonly referred to as the "financial bailout" in
political discussions, even though the funding is structured as investments
that may yield positive returns (which means, the net cost to taxpayers could
conceivably be much lower than $700 billion, over several years).  
  
\- The essence of the financial bailout is that the Secretary of the Treasury
is empowered to purchase "troubled assets" in the banking and insurance
industry. with the intent of stabilizing and then re-selling those assets when
the crisis is past.  
  
\- The final legislation went through several major revisions in Congress,
including two well-publicized NO votes in the US House, followed by public
speeches from Pres. Bush that changes would follow. Sen. McCain suspended his
presidential campaign to deal with one version of the bailout vote.  
  
\- The popular $700 billion figure is also inaccurate; the final legislation
totalled $850 billion, adding $150 billion in unrelated projects to garner
positive votes from holdout members of Congress.  
  
\- The taxpayer cost of the bailout, if it totals a net cost of $700 billion,
would be $4,635 per working American (based on an estimate of 151 million in
the work force).  
  
\- Rhetoric abounds on both sides of the financial bailout: proponents insist
it was necessary to avoid a full-blown Depression; opponents insist it is a
federal takeover of the banking industry destined to cause hyperinflation.

### Great Recession

  * **Dodd-Frank**: refers to Sen. Chris Dodd (D, CT) and Rep. Barney Frank (D, MA), the co-authors of the DoddFrank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. The legislation was intended to reform the rules of the financial and insurance industry to avoid another "meltdown" like the one in mid-2008 which initiated the Great Recession. 
  * **Earmarks**: refers to itemized spending in legislation, i.e., funding targeted toward a particular project in a particular place. The controversy comes about because often the particular place includes the home district of the legislator writing or sponsoring the bill (which is known derisively as "Pork-Barrel Spending"). Earmarks are currently legal and are generally considered ethical; earmark reform focuses on publicizing their existence and perhaps on a future Line Item Veto to remove some. 
  * **PAYGO**: refers to a "pay-as-you-go" policy, where all expenditures in a bill are explicitly paid for, instead of requiring borrowing. The Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 required all new spending bills to include how the spending would be balanced by revenue enhancements (taxes or fees) or other spending cuts. The PAYGO statute expired in 2002, but some congressional bills still describe offsets for new spending. 
  * **Simpson-Bowles**: refers to the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, and its conclusions released in 2010. It is named after its two chairs, Sen. Alan Simpson (R, WY) and Erskine Bowles (D, NC). The Commission proposed reducing the national debt by a combination of increased revenue (raising taxes, including a 15-cent gas tax); reductions in discretionary spending; Medicare cost controls; raising the Social Security retirement age; and a reduction in entitlements. 

**| [Close](javascript:closeWin\(\)) | **  
---

